Title: Coding for kids: not just another silly fad, but also not like cursive writing
Date: 2017-08-22 13:58
Author: dastels
Category: Uncategorized
Slug: coding-for-kids
Status: draft

Two recent opinion pieces, Kelly Lovell's [*Coding is the new cursive
writing – and we have to embrace
it*](https://beta.theglobeandmail.com/opinion/coding-is-the-new-cursive-writing-and-we-have-to-embrace-it/article35776671/)
and [*Coding for kids: another silly
fad*](https://beta.theglobeandmail.com/opinion/coding-for-kids-another-silly-fad/article35982667)
by Margaret Wente appear to be at the ends of the coding spectrum
regarding technology education. Lovell argues that coding literacy and
specifically AI abilities will be crucial in the coming job market. On
the flip side, Wente quotes Alex Usher as saying that coding might be
useful for 2% of that job market.

My view is more pragmatic: they're both both right and wrong.

I agree with Lovell that a STEM-savvy workforce is desirable and will be
required. Manual/repetitive/unskilled jobs are continuing to be
automated; even cab drivers are being automated into the history books.

However, not every person who would be an unskilled worker should be a
"coder." Seems most people talking about coding or learning to code
don't know much about it. Writing instructions for computers, apps, and
websites is a small part of what is involved.

Talking about teaching coding is a red herring. It's not coding that is
important, it's what coding involves: thinking critically and creatively
to solve problems using technology, specifically computer technology.

Just as chemistry, physics, biology, calculus, etc., help us understand
the physical world, coding can––and does––teach critical thinking,
creativity, and problem solving in relation to the technological world,
a not-small aspect of life now and into the future. In suggesting coding
is a fad Wente would have our children be ignorant of how this part of
our world works.

Those are things we want our educated populace to have.

Teaching children coding for its own sake is not overly useful. What we
need to be focusing on is teaching children to solve real world problems
in innovative ways using technology. That will often involve writing
some code, but it also involves varying amounts of mechanical
engineering, electronics, chemistry, physics, math. Teaching THAT is
what will put our children (and our country) in a prime position to take
part in a world that uses and depends on technology. Not just as users
but more importantly as creators, innovators, and makers. THAT should be
the goal... not trying to teach them to write the next flappy bird app.
